So now we have we really do have the panorama of all times and moods in Spanish.
So now that's everything.
That's every tense including both the idea of time and the idea of mood.
We've learnt how to construct them all and we should really listen actively to refresh.
Any knowledge that we might need to refresh through our exposure to Spanish.
No?
Analyzing always what we hear.
And if you're listening to a song or a movie, maybe you just hear the endings
of the verbs at the beginning, but if you can identify what that ending means, that's the important bit.
In the same way this course has been focused
equally on the process that we go through in building our structures in Spanish as it has been focused on content.
So half of the point of this course has been content, has been teaching you Spanish, and the other half has been how to manage Spanish
How to manage these elements that we've learned, how to think about this information and how to relate to information generally in a new way.
How to find things that you think you might have forgotten
We've also looked now and then at some irregularities in Spanish, verbs or other words that don't follow the rules that we learnt.
Now, the older the language, the more irregularities it tends to have.
Spanish, effectively being modern Latin, is quite prone to irregularities
But the irregularities can be made sense of within themselves.
You can group together irregularities.
So whilst throughout the course we were looking at the odd irregularity as it popped up
Now at the end of the course we are going to tidy up the irregular verbs.
So there are a group of verbs.
Which we can call the got verbs.
These are the verbs that use go instead of o for the I form.
For example, how do you say to have?
To have for possession?
Tener.
Tener and I have?
Tengo.
So this go pops up for the I version, but only for the I version.
How do you say he has or she has, you fool have
Tiene and you informal tienes and they tienen and we
Tenemos.
So the go is only popping up for the I version.
What was to come?
Venir.
Venir, good.
I come.
Bengo.
So here we have the go again.
But he comes.
Viene.
They come.
You informal vienes venimos
Good.
So we have this go popping up just for the I form.
We've seen other verbs like this.
What was to go out or to leave?
Salir.
And I go out or I leave?
Salgo.
To put poner.
Poner.
And I put
Tongo.
Good.
We have the sir, to say, or to tell, and we get ego, which is even more irregular, but we see the geo.
we have aser to make or to do and we get ago oir which means
to hear oir and we have oigo eye here traer traer means to bring
And I bring is trigo.
So to bring is T-R-A-E-R, Traer.
And then I is TRIGO.
It takes an extra I.
So here we get trigo.
Traer is interesting because traer means to bring, but when it forms part of another verb we can translate it like tract.
For example, extraer means
Extract.
Good.
How would you say attract?
Atraer.
Contract.
Contraer.
Distract.
Distraer.
Good.
I distract.
Distraigo.
Or you could say I get distracted.
Me distraigo.
Good.
So these go verbs
Are a little bit special and they behave quite irregularly, but more or less in the same way.
One of the things they do in the same way is that in the mood tense
Instead of switching vowels like the rest of the verbs do in the mood tense in the present, they go from go
To ga.
So whilst in the normal present, this go only pops up for I.
We have tengo, tienes, tienes, tienes, tenemos.
The ga for the mood senses for everybody.
So we get tenga for I, he, she it, the new formal.
How would you make it informal?
Exactly.
So if you were to say I want you to come, I want that you come speaking informally.
So I want that
Good.
Now we want you come and we want the mood tense version.
So it's a go verb, so our base for the mood tense is benga.
So if you want to speak informally and say, I want that you come, I want you to come.
Quiero che vengas.
Very good.
And you will hear actually in Spain, benga, benga, benga.
They use it all the time, meaning come on, come on, benga, bale.
They say bale.
as well in Spain.
Benga Vale.
You will hear this all the time.
When a Spanish person is hanging up the telephone you can hear fifteen of them.
Venga vale, vale, venga, venga vale.
So this benga that you will hear around a lot will be a nice hook to remember that this goes to ga.
Actually, when somebody is answering the phone in Spain, you might hear diga or digame
What does that mean?
Digame.
Tell me.
Yes, the mood tense by itself is an order.
For a positive order then we have the me after the verb.
Digame.
So you will hear people answering the phone like this in Spain.
Tell me, dígame.
So traer was to bring.
What is I bring?
Traigo.
And what is you bring speaking informally?
Traikas.
This is the moot tense, but we don't want the mood tense.
We just want you bring informally.
Tries?
Tries.
Good.
But if you say I want you to bring it, how would you say that?
I want you to bring it informally.
Very good.
I don't want you to distract me.
Still inform.
No quiero que me distragas.
Very good.
I don't want you to distract me.